# REWARDING PROGRESS: SCALING AUTOMATED PROCESS VERIFIERS FOR LLM REASONING

## ABSTRACT

A promising approach for improving reasoning in large language models is to use process reward models (PRMs). PRMs provide feedback at each step of a multi-step reasoning trace, improving credit assignment over outcome reward models (ORMs) that only provide feedback at the final step. However, collecting dense, per-step human labels is not scalable, and training PRMs from automatically-labeled data has thus far led to limited gains. With the goal of using PRMs to improve a base policy via test-time search and reinforcement learning (RL), we ask: "How should we design process rewards?" Our key insight is that, to be effective, the process reward for a step should measure progress: a change in the likelihood of producing a correct response in the future, before and after taking the step, as measured under a prover policy distinct from the base policy. Such progress values can distinguish good and bad steps generated by the base policy, even though the base policy itself cannot. Theoretically, we show that even weaker provers can improve the base policy, as long as they distinguish steps without being too misaligned with the base policy. Our results show that process rewards defined as progress under such provers improve the efficiency of exploration during test-time search and online RL. We empirically validate our claims by training process advantage verifiers (PAVs) to measure progress under such provers and show that compared to ORM, they are > 8% more accurate, and $1.5-5\times$ more compute-efficient. Equipped with these insights, our PAVs enable one of the first results showing a 6x gain in sample efficiency for a policy trained using online RL with PRMs vs. ORMs.

---

## 1 INTRODUCTION

Trained reward models or verifiers are often used to improve math reasoning in large language models, either by re-ranking solutions at test-time (Collins, 2000) or during reinforcement learning (RL) (Uesato et al., 2022). Typically, verifiers are trained to predict the outcome of an entire reasoning trace, often referred to as outcome reward models (ORM) (Cobbe et al., 2021b; Hosseini et al., 2024). However, ORMs only provide a sparse signal of correctness, which is hard to learn from and inefficient to search against. This challenge is alleviated by fine-grained supervision, in theory. For reasoning, prior works train process reward models (PRMs) that assign intermediate rewards after each step of search (Snell et al., 2024) or during RL. While Lightman et al. (2023) obtains PRM annotations from human raters, this approach is not scalable. More recent works (Wang et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024) train PRMs to predict automatically-generated annotations that estimate future success of solving the problem, akin to value functions in RL. So far, automated PRMs, especially as dense rewards in RL, only improve by 1-2% over ORMs (Shao et al., 2024), raising doubts about their utility.

To resolve these uncertainties, in this paper, our goal is to train automated PRMs that can improve a base policy, via compute efficient test-time search, and sample-efficient online RL with PRMs as dense rewards. For this, we first ask: (i) what should the per-step process rewards measure, and (ii) what kind of automated data collection strategy should we use to train PRMs that predict this measure. For (i), conventional belief (Lightman et al., 2023; Uesato et al., 2022) has been to measure mathematical correctness or relevance of steps. But, it is unclear if this supervision yields the most improvement in the base policy (e.g., a policy may need to generate simpler, repetitive, and even incorrect steps to explore and discover the final answer during test-time search and RL). Our key insight is that per-step, process rewards that measure notion of progress: change in the likelihood of arriving at a correct final answer before and after taking the step, are effective, for both test-time beam search and online RL. Reinforcing promising steps that make progress regardless of whether they appear in a correct or incorrect trace results in overall better exploration of possible answers at initial steps, which is crucial when the approach to solve a problem is not clear. Formally, such rewards correspond to per-step advantages of steps from the RL literature (Sutton & Barto, 2018). We empirically show that using advantages in conjunction with ORM rewards outperforms using future probabilities of success or Q-values (Wang et al., 2024) for both search and RL. This is because, in the combinatorial space of responses, Q-values mainly "exploit" states whereas advantages also "explore" steps that make the most progress towards the final answer.

To answer (ii) above, we first note that advantages under a poor base policy are $\approx 0$ on most steps, and thus will not be informative for test-time search. More generally, we argue that regardless of the strength of the base policy, using its own per-step advantages as process rewards in RL will result in updates equivalent to only using outcome rewards. Hence, we propose to use advantages estimated via rollouts under a different "prover" policy as process rewards. How should we choose this prover policy? A natural guess would be to use a very capable prover policy, akin to how strong reward models are found to be effective for RLHF (Gao et al., 2023). However, we show advantages under an overly capable prover, that can succeed from any step, fail to distinguish between good and bad steps. A similar argument holds for very weak provers. We formalize this intuition to define good provers as policies that are complementary to the base policy, i.e., policies that can distinguish steps, while producing advantages correlated with the base policy. For example, when restricted to the special case of Best-of-K policies corresponding to a base policy, the set of good provers consists of policies for $K > 1$ with not too large values of K. Contrary to intuition, in general, this set also contains policies that are worse than the base policy, but can still improve it. We show that dense verifiers trained to predict advantages of these prover policies, which we call process advantage verifiers (PAVs), accelerate sample and compute efficiency of RL and search.

With the conceptual design of PAVs in place, we prescribe practical workflows for training PAVs and demonstrate their efficacy on a series of 2B, 9B, and 27B Gemma2 models (Gemma Team et al., 2024). PAV training data is gathered by sampling "seed" solution traces from the prover and partial rollouts from the same to estimate the Q-value at each prefix of the seed trace. Our workflow prescribes favorable ratios for seed and partial rollouts. Our first set of empirical results show that for an equal budget of test-time compute, combining beam search with trained PAVs is > 8% better in accuracy, and 1.5-5x more compute efficient compared to best-of-N re-ranking against an ORM. Dense rewards from PAVs improve the efficiency of step-level exploration during search by pruning the combinatorial space of solutions aggressively and honing in on a diverse set of possible sequences. Finally, we demonstrate for the first time, that using PAVs as dense rewards in RL scales up data efficiency by 6x compared to only using outcome rewards. Moreover, base policies trained with PAVs also achieve 8x better Pass@N performance (chance of sampling the correct solution in N attempts), and consequently afford a higher ceiling on the performance of any test-time re-ranker.

---

## 2 PRELIMINARIES, DEFINITIONS, AND NOTATION

Following protocols from Uesato et al. (2022); Lightman et al. (2023), a reasoning trace from an LLM consists of multiple logical steps separated by a demarcation token. An outcome reward model (ORM) is a trained verifier that assigns a scalar numerical score after the last step of the trace, and a process reward model (PRM) is a trained verifier that scores each step of the trace individually.

**Problem setup and notation.** Given a math problem $x \in X$ our goal is to improve a base policy $\pi$ that samples a response $y \sim \pi(\cdot|x)$ in the set Y. A response y consists of multiple reasoning steps (maximum H), separated by a delimiter ('next line' in our case), i.e., $y=(a_{1},a_{2},...,a_{H}).$ Since sampling is auto-regressive, we can view each step as an action taken by the agent in a Markov decision process with deterministic dynamics. Specifically, we treat the prefix $(x,a_{1},...,a_{h-1})$ as the current state $s_{h}$ and next step $a_{h} \sim \pi(\cdot|x)$ as the action taken by at $s_{h}$, resulting in the next state $s_{h+1}$. For problem x, with ground-truth response $y_{x}^{*}$, we can evaluate the accuracy of by running a regular expression match on the final answer (Hendrycks et al., 2021): $R_{ex}(y,y_{x}^{*}) \mapsto \{0,1\},$ i.e., accuracy is given by $\mathbb{E}_{y \sim \pi(\cdot|x)}[R_{ex}(y,y_{x}^{*})]$. Now, given a dataset $\mathcal{D}=\{(x_{i},y_{x_{i}}^{*})\}_{i}$ of problem-solution pairs, the main goal is to learn a good base policy by optimizing accuracy on D. Next, we see how we can leverage the final answer verifier $R_{ex}$ available on D to train ORMs and PRMs.

**Outcome reward model (ORM).** Given a response y, an ORM estimates the ground-truth correctness $R_{ex}(y,y_{x}^{*})$. To train such a model we first take problems in D, and collect training data of the form $\{(x,y \sim \pi(\cdot|x), R_{ex}(y,y_{x}^{*}))\}$. Then we train an ORM that takes as input a problem-response pair (x, y) and predicts $R_{ex}(y,y_{x}^{*})$. At test time, when $y_{x}^{*}$ is unknown, the ORM is used to score candidate solutions revealed by test-time search. Given a base $\pi$, a best-of-K policy ($BoK(\pi)$) is a policy that samples K responses from $\pi$, scores them against ORM, and returns the one with the highest score. Note that, whenever ORM matches $R_{ex}$, and the likelihood of $\pi$ solving problem x is $p_{x}$, then for BoK($\pi$) this likelihood is $1-(1-p_{x})^{K}$, making it a policy stronger than $\pi$.

**Typical process reward models (PRMs).** A PRM scores every step $a_{h}$ in a multi-step response $y \sim \pi$ (e.g., in Lightman et al. (2023) PRMs are trained to score correct steps over incorrect and irrelevant ones). But, unlike ORMs, which only require $R_{ex}$ for data collection, PRM training data requires expensive step-level human annotations. Prior work (Wang et al., 2024; Setlur et al., 2024) attempted to scale process rewards automatically by sampling from the model to provide a heuristic understanding of when a step is actually correct. In particular, they evaluate a prefix by computing the expected future accuracy of multiple completions sampled from $\pi$, after conditioning on the prefix, i.e., value function $Q^{\pi}$ (Eq. 1) from RL. Luo et al. (2024) use $Q^{\pi}$ as the PRM that assigns a score of $Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h})$ to the action $a_{h}$, at state $s_{h}$. Similarly, $V^{\pi}(s_{h}) := \mathbb{E}_{a_{h} \sim \pi(\cdot|s_{h})}Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}).$

$$
Q^{\pi}((x,a_{1},...,a_{h-1}), a_{h}) = \mathbb{E}_{a_{h+1},...,a_{H} \sim \pi(\cdot|s_{h},a_{h})}[R_{ex}((a_{1},...,a_{H}),y_{x}^{*})] \quad (1)
$$

**Using PRMs for beam search at test-time.** Given a PRM, a natural way to spend test-time compute is to use it as a reranker within a beam search procedure (Snell et al., 2024). For each problem, at step 0, a beam of maximum width B, is initialized with a single state consisting of just the problem. At a given step h, a beam contains partial responses unrolled till a set of states $\{s_{i}\}_{i=1}^{B}$. From each state $s_{i}$ in this set, C independent actions or steps $\{a_{i,j}\}_{j=1}^{C}$ are sampled from $\pi(\cdot|s_{i})$, each of which corresponds to a new state. Process rewards assign a score to every new state $(s_{i},a_{i,j})$; and only the states corresponding to the top-B values are retained in the beam for the next step.

---

## 3 HOW SHOULD WE DEFINE PROCESS REWARDS AND WHY?

Ultimately, we are interested in test-time search and RL methods that can most efficiently and reliably discover solution traces with the correct final answer, thus maximizing $R_{ex}$. To this end, process rewards should serve as step-level supervision to maximize outcome-level $R_{ex}$. Our position contrasts with conventional belief that process rewards should mainly evaluate mathematical correctness or relevance of individual steps (Lightman et al., 2023; Uesato et al., 2022), since LLMs might need to generate trivial or repetitive intermediate steps in order to discover a trace with the correct final answer. With this insight, in this section we approach the design of dense automated step rewards as a form of supervision to be used in conjunction with sparse outcome rewards in order to learn good policies.

In an MDP, a starting point to design state-level dense feedback that is eventually meant to optimize a sparse outcome reward is the notion of a reward-shaping function (Ng et al., 1999): in our case, a function that summarizes some statistic of the outcome reward attained in the future, under some policy rolled out from that state. Under this framework, in Sec. 3.1, we evaluate two different choices of the reward-shaping functions and show that advantages - not value functions (Wang et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024) - that measure a notion of "progress" at each new step are more appropriate for exploration during search and RL. Then in Secs. 3.3 and 3.4, we show that progress is measured best under a policy $\mu$, different from the base policy $\pi$. We call this policy $\mu$, a prover policy.

### 3.1 PROCESS REWARDS SHOULD BE ADVANTAGES, NOT VALUE FUNCTIONS

Setting aside how prover $\mu$ informs the reward-shaping function, we study a simplified setting of test-time beam search, and present some challenges with the reward design of Snell et al. (2024), which uses $Q^{\pi}$ of the base policy $\pi$ to assign rewards for a state-action pair $(s_{h},a_{h})$. Consider the example in Fig. 2(a), where from the 2 states in the beam, we sample 3 actions. If we only exploit the next states with highest values of $Q^{\pi}$, we would be comparing steps sampled from different states (e.g., $a_{1,1}$ vs. $a_{2,1}$). Clearly, a reduction in $Q^{\pi}(s_{1},a_{1,1}) - V^{\pi}(s_{1})$ means that $a_{1,1}$ by itself has a negative effect of -0.05 on the probability of success from the $s_{1}$, whereas $a_{2,1}$ has a positive effect of +0.20 from $s_{2}$. However, expanding the beam based on absolute values of $Q^{\pi}$ retains the action that makes negative progress, and removes state $s_{2}$ from the beam (as the size of the beam is 2). In other words, $Q^{\pi}$ makes it hard to decouple the "evaluation" of an action (step), from the "promise" shown by the previous state. This will not be an issue for every problem, and particularly not when the beam capacity is unbounded, but under finite computational and sampling constraints, using $Q^{\pi}$ might retain states with potentially unfavorable steps that hurt the overall likelihood of success. On the other hand, when deciding what to retain in the beam, if we could also also explore the progress made by the previous step along with the likelihood of success $Q^{\pi}$ then we can address this tradeoff.

**How can we measure the "progress" made by a step?** One approach is to consider the relative increase/decrease in the likelihood of success, before and after the step. This notion is formalized by the advantage (Eq. 2) of a step under policy $\pi$. Furthermore, since advantages can attach either positive or negative values to a step, the base policy is trained not only when it generates a step that makes progress (where $A^{\pi} > 0$), but also when it fails to produce one, employing a "negative gradient" that speeds up RL training (Tajwar et al., 2024).

$$
A^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}) := Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}) - V^{\pi}(s_{h}) = Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}) - Q^{\pi}(s_{h-1},a_{h-1}). \quad (2)
$$

Since we view process rewards as reward-shaping functions in the MDP, they can be computed under any policy $\mu$, which can be the base policy. However, based on the example in Figure 2a, the reasons why $Q^{\pi}$ is a sub-optimal choice for process rewards also apply to $Q^{\mu}.$ Nevertheless, we can possibly use advantage under $\mu$: $A^{\mu}$, which measures the progress made by a step to improve the likelihood of success under $\mu$. In that case, how should we choose this policy $\mu$, which we call the prover policy, and should it be necessarily different from base $\pi$? Before diving into the choice of $\mu$, we discuss: how should we use $A^{\mu}$ in conjunction with outcome rewards for improving $\pi$?

### 3.2 OUR APPROACH: PROCESS ADVANTAGE VERIFIERS (PAV)

For building an approach that uses process rewards $A^{\mu}$ together with the outcome reward $R_{ex}$ to improve the base policy $\pi$, we situate ourselves in the context of improving with online RL. If all we had was access to $R_{ex}$ on $\mathcal{D}$, the standard RL objective is given by:

$$
\mathcal{L}_{ORM-RL}(\pi) := \mathbb{E}_{x \sim \mathcal{D},(a_{1},...,a_{H}) \sim \pi(\cdot|x)}[R_{ex}((x,a_{1},...,a_{H}),y_{x}^{*})]. \quad (3)
$$

Inspired by how reward bonuses are additive in RL (Ng et al., 1999; Bellemare et al., 2016), one way to use process rewards $A^{\mu}$ is to additively combine it with the standard RL objective in this way:

$$
\mathcal{L}_{PAV-RL}(\pi) := \mathcal{L}_{ORM-RL}(\pi) + \alpha \cdot \sum_{h=1}^{H} \mathbb{E}_{s_{h} \sim d_{h}^{\pi}} \mathbb{E}_{a_{h} \sim \pi(\cdot|s_{h})} [A^{\mu}(s_{h},a_{h})] \quad (4)
$$

The term in red is the difference in likelihoods of success of the prover $\mu$, summed over consecutive steps (a notion of progress). Here, $d_{h}^{\pi}$ denotes the distribution over states at step h, visited by the old policy $\pi^{\prime}$ (policy at previous iterate). Following policy gradient derivations (Sutton et al., 1999):

$$
\nabla_{\pi}\mathcal{L}_{PAV-RL}^{\pi^{\prime}=\pi}(\pi)|_{\pi^{\prime}=\pi} = \sum_{h=1}^{n} \nabla_{\pi} \log \pi(a_{h}|s_{h}) \cdot \underbrace{(Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}) + \alpha \cdot A^{\mu}(s_{h},a_{h}))}_{\text{effective reward}} \quad (5)
$$

At a glance, we can view $Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}) + \alpha A^{\mu}(s_{h},a_{h})$ as the effective reward for step $a_{h}$ when scored against a combination of the outcome evaluation $R_{ex}$, i.e., $Q^{\pi}$, and process rewards $A^{\mu}.$ Thus, we can optimize Eq. 4 indirectly via (a) running beam-search against the effective reward; or (b) online RL where the policy gradients are given by Eq. 5. For either of these, we need access to verifiers that are trained to predict the advantage $A^{\mu}(s_{h},a_{h})$ under the prover. We refer to these verifiers as process advantage verifiers (PAVs). In Sec. D we describe how to train PAVs, but now we use the above formulation to reason about how to choose prover $\mu$ that is most effective at improving base $\pi$.

We also remark that the term in red resembles prior work on imitation learning via policy optimization (Ross & Bagnell, 2014; Sun et al., 2017), where the main aim is to learn a policy that imitates the prover $\mu$, or to improve upon it minimally. Of course, this is limiting since our goal is to not just take actions that perform at a similar level as $\mu$, but to improve the base policy even further, and using a combination of $Q^{\pi}$ (exploitation) and $A^{\mu}$ (exploration) is critical towards optimizing the goal.

**How should we choose the prover $\mu$?** Perhaps a natural starting point is to set the prover to be identical to the base policy, i.e., $\mu=\pi$, which produces process rewards that prior works have considered Shao et al. (2024). However, setting $A^{\mu}=A^{\pi}$ in Eq. 5 results in exactly the same policy gradient update as only optimizing outcome evaluation $R_{ex}$. Moreover, for a poor base policy $\pi$, where $Q^{\pi} \approx 0$ on most states, the term $A^{\pi}$ would also be $\approx 0$, and hence running beam search with the effective rewards would not be informative at all. Hence, a better approach is to use a different prover policy, but a very weak prover $\mu$ will likely run into similar issues as a poor base policy. We could instead use a very capable prover $\mu$, but unfortunately even this may not be any better than optimizing (exploiting) only the outcome rewards, $Q^{\pi}$ either. To see why, consider a scenario where $\pi$'s response contains an intermediate step that does not help make progress towards the solution (e.g., $\pi$ simply restates the question, see Fig. 2(b)). Here, $Q^{\mu}$ for a capable prover before and after this irrelevant step will be identical since $\mu$ can succeed from either step. This means that $\mu$ fails to distinguish steps, resulting in $A^{\mu} \approx 0$ in most cases. Training with this process reward during RL will then lead to gradients that are equivalent to those observed when purely optimizing $\mathcal{L}_{ORM-RL}.$ In fact, empirically, we observe that online RL with $Q^{\mu}$ from strong provers leads to polices that only produce re-phrasings of the question (App. G) and do not succeed at solving the question. Clearly, any policy different from the base policy cannot serve as a prover. So, how do we identify a set of good provers? Can they indeed be weaker than the base policy? We answer in the next sections.

**Takeaway: What should process rewards measure during test-time search and online RL?**

* Process rewards should correspond to progress, or advantage, as opposed to absolute Q-values, for a better explore-exploit tradeoff during beam search and online RL.
* Advantages should be computed using a prover policy, different from the base policy.

### 3.3 ANALYSIS IN A DIDACTIC SETTING: LEARNING A PLANTED SUB-SEQUENCE

In this section, we aim to characterize prover policies that are effective in improving the base policy. To do so, we first introduce a didactic example, representative of real reasoning scenarios to illustrate the main intuition. Then, we will formalize these intuitions in the form of theoretical results.

**Didactic example setup.** Given an unknown sub-sequence $y^{*}$ consisting of tokens from vocabulary $V:=\{1,2,...,15\}$, we train a policy $\pi$ to produce a response which contains this sub-sequence. The task completion reward is terminal and sparse, i.e., $r(y,y^{*})=1$ for a y if and only if $y^{*}$ appears in y. By design, the reward $r(y,y^{*})$ resembles outcome reward $R_{ex}(y,y_{x}^{*})$ in Sec. 2. The prover policy $\mu$ is a procedural policy, parameterized by a scalar $\gamma > 0$ (details in App. B). As $\gamma$ increases, the performance of $\mu$ improves and $\to 1$ as $\gamma \rightarrow \infty$. For simplicity, we assume oracle access to ground-truth $A^{\mu}$ and $Q^{\pi}$, and alleviate errors from learned verifiers approximating these values.

**(1) RL with effective reward $Q^{\pi}+\alpha A^{\mu}$ is 10x more sample-efficient than only outcome reward.** In Fig. 3(a), we first note that training with this effective reward under a prover $\mu$ with strength $\gamma=10$ produces optimal performance (100% accuracy) in < 1k iterations, despite starting from a mediocre initialization for $\pi$ ($\gamma=5.0$). Training with only outcome reward is ineffective and requires > 10k iterations. More importantly, in Fig. 3(b), we note that effective rewards only help for a set of provers, in $\gamma \in [8.0, 15.0]$. Outside this range, we observed $A^{\mu} \approx 0$ on most states, either because $\mu$ was poor (small $\gamma$) and was unable to generate $y^{*}$ even when got the sequence partially correct, or because $\mu$ was strong (large $\gamma$) that it generated y with almost equal likelihood from all prefixes.

**(2) Effective reward improves Pass @N by 5x over only outcome reward.** We report the "Pass @N" performance in Fig. 3(c), which measures if any out of N i.i.d. samples from $\pi$ have reward 1 and hence, presents the ceiling on the performance of any test-time search method that picks a single response from multiple draws (e.g., as in Best-of-N). For a policy trained with the effective reward for 100 iterations, the Pass @N performance grows 5x faster with N, compared to the policy trained with only the outcome reward. Due to only sparse feedback, the latter policy does not learn to sample partially correct $y^{*}$, whereas a policy trained with the effective reward produces partially correct y*, and is able to sample the complete $y^{*}$ with higher likelihood during Pass @N.

**Takeaway: Online RL with process rewards from different prover policies.**
Effective rewards $Q^{\pi} + \alpha A^{\mu}$ from prover $\mu$: (i) improve sample efficiency of online RL, and (ii) yield policies with better Pass @N performance, over using only outcome rewards. But, advantages of very capable or poor $\mu$ do not improve base policy beyond outcome rewards.

### 3.4 THEORY: PROVERS COMPLEMENTARY TO BASE POLICY BOOST IMPROVEMENT

From our didactic analysis, it is clear that process rewards $A^{\mu}$ under different provers $\mu$ disparately affect the base policy that optimizes $Q^{\pi} + \alpha A^{\mu}$ via online RL. We now present a formal analysis of why this happens and characterize a class of provers that can guarantee non-trivial improvements to the base policy. For simplicity, we assume oracle access to $Q^{\pi}$ and $A^{\mu}$ at every state-action pair $(s_{h},a_{h})$ and prove our result in the tabular RL setting, where the policy class is parameterized using the softmax parameterization in Agarwal et al. (2021). Proofs for this section are in App. F.

**Main intuitions.** We expect a prover $\mu$ to improve a base policy only when $\mu$ is able to distinguish different actions taken by $\pi$, by attaining sufficiently varying advantage values $A^{\mu}(s_{h},a)$ for actions a at state $s_{h}$. This can be formalized under the notion of sufficiently large variance across actions, $\mathbb{V}_{a \sim \pi}[A^{\mu}(s_{h},a)]$. In that case, can we simply use a policy with large advantage variance under any measure? No, because when the prover $\mu$ ranks actions at a given state very differently compared to the base policy $\pi$ (e.g., if $A^{\mu}$ and $A^{\pi}$ are opposite), then effective rewards $Q^{\pi} + \alpha A^{\mu}$ will be less reliable due to conflicting learning signals. Thus, we want $\mathbb{E}_{\pi}[\langle A^{\mu}, A^{\pi} \rangle]$ to not be too negative, so that $\mu$ and $\pi$ are reasonably aligned on their assessment of steps from $\pi$.

In Theorem 3.1, we present our result on policy improvement where the base policy is updated with natural policy gradient (Kakade, 2001): $\pi_{t+1}(a|s_{h}) \propto \exp(\gamma \cdot (A^{\pi}(s_{h},a) + A^{\mu}(s_{h},a)))$. We note that in this idealized update rule, swapping Q values (of $\mu$ or $\pi$) with advantages does not affect the update, since we only subtract an action-independent offset. Consequently, the analysis only uncovers good choices for the prover policy $\mu$ for process reward $A^{\mu}$, and is orthogonal to the design consideration of advantages or Q-values as process rewards. Theorem 3.1 formalizes our intuition by showing that policy improvement at iteration 1, grows as the variance in $A^{\mu}$ values increases (higher distinguishability) and reduces when $A^{\mu}$ and $A^{\pi}$ become extremely misaligned. This will then allow us to discuss a special case for the case of Best-of-K policies as provers as an immediate corollary.

**Theorem 3.1** (Lower bound on policy improvement). For base policy iterate $\pi_t$, after one update step with learning rate $\gamma \ll 1$ over state distribution $\rho$, there exists a constant $C > 0$ s.t. the following holds:

$$
\mathbb{E}_{s \sim \rho}[V^{\pi_{t+1}}(s) - V^{\pi_{t}}(s)] \ge C\gamma \underbrace{\mathbb{E}_{s \sim \rho} \mathbb{V}_{a \sim \pi}[A^{\mu}(s,a)]}_{\text{distinguishability from } \pi} + \underbrace{\gamma \mathbb{E}_{s \sim \rho} \mathbb{E}_{a \sim \pi}[A^{\mu}(s,a)A^{\pi}(s,a)]}_{\text{alignment between } \pi \text{ and } \mu} \quad (6)
$$

It may seem that the base policy can only learn from an improved prover $\mu$, but our result shows that a weak prover can also amplify a stronger base policy, since a weak prover $\mu$ may have a lower average of $Q^{\mu}$ under its own measure, but still have higher variance across $Q^{\mu}$ (compared to $Q^{\pi}$) when evaluated under $\pi$ (see Proposition F.1 in App. F.5 for formal discussion). This tells us that rewarding progress under a prover is different from typical knowledge distillation or imitation learning algorithms (Hinton, 2015; Rusu et al., 2015) that in most cases remain upper bounded by the performance of the stronger teacher. So provers cannot be characterized purely by strength, what is a class of provers that is a reasonable starting point if we were to improve any base policy $\pi$?

**The policy class of "Best-of-K" (computed over base policies) contain complementary provers.** A good starting point to identify good provers for a base policy $\pi$, is the class of Best-of-K policies or $BoK(\pi)$. Recall from Sec. 2 that the performance of $BoK(\pi)$ increases monotonically with K. Thus, we can vary K to obtain a class of policies with increasing strengths, starting from $\pi$. Applying Theorem 3.1 to this class, we arrive at Remark 3.1 that recommends using $BoK(\pi)$ with $K > 1$ as a prover policy for a poor base policy $\pi$. Conversely, when $Q^{\pi}(s,a) \approx 1$, then increasing K too much can hurt variance on those states (see Appendix F.4). In the next section, we empirically note that the policies in the class of $BoK(\pi)$ indeed induce different performance gains when used as prover policies, and we find Bo4 to be a good choice for test-time search over most base policies.

**Remark 3.1.** When $Q^{\pi}(s,a) = O(1/K), \forall s, a$, using $BoK(\pi)$ as a prover for base improves distinguishability (and improvement) by $\Omega(K^{2})$, and makes alignment worse at most by $O(K)$.

**Takeaway: Formal characterization of good prover policies that improve the base policy.**
Provers with advantages that can distinguish actions taken by the base policy (more strongly than the base policy itself) but are not too misaligned from the base, boost improvements on each update of the base policy. We call such policies complementary provers. $BoK(\pi)$ for any base policy for $K > 1$ can provide a good starting choice of prover policies.

---

## 4 TEST-TIME: EFFICIENTLY SCALING TEST-TIME COMPUTE WITH PAVS

Now, we study how process verifiers can scale up test-time compute. While our derivations from Sec. 3.2 were with RL, we can also use the effective reward $Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}) + \alpha \cdot A^{\mu}(s_{h},a_{h})$ for running beam search over intermediate steps sampled from base policy $\pi$. In the end, we select the final response in the beam using an ORM. In practice, we need to train PRMs that predict $Q^{\pi}$ (we call these PQVs) and PAVs that predict $A^{\mu}$, procedures that we discuss in App. D. For now, we assume access to trained ORMs, PQVs and PAVs and discuss test-time search results. For clarity, we abuse notation and refer to the estimated effective reward (ORM + a PAV) as PAV directly.

**Setup.** We finetune Gemma 2B, 9B, and 27B (Gemma Team et al., 2024) on MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) via supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to get three base policies. The set of provers consists of the three base SFT policies themselves as well as their best-of-K policies for different values of $K \in \{2^{0},...,2^{5}\}$. Additional details for the experiments in this section are in App. C.

### 4.1 PAVS SCALE TEST-TIME COMPUTE BY 5-10x OVER ORMS

**Result 1: PAVs are more compute efficient than ORMs.** In Fig. 4, we plot the performance of beam search with PAVs for different sizes of the beam N, and compare it with best-of-N using ORMs, i.e., sampling N complete solutions from the base policy and returning the one with the highest ORM score. Our comparisons report compute efficiency of PAVs over ORMs: ratio of total compute needed by PAVs to obtain the same performance as running best-of-128 with ORM. Accounting for the additional compute needed for beam search (since each element in the beam samples $C=3$ next steps, before scoring and pruning the beam), PAVs scale the compute efficiency by 10x over ORMs for Gemma-2B, 9B base policies, and by 5x for Gemma-27B. For all base policies $\pi$, we use $BoK(\pi)$ with $K=4$ as the prover policy. We also compare performance with beam search using process verifiers that only predict $Q^{\pi}$, and best-of-N where the ORM is replaced with PAV (PAV-as-ORM). At $N=128$, similar to Luo et al. (2024), we note a similar gain of 4% for "PAV-as-ORM" Fig. 5(a) over only ORMs, for base Gemma-9B $\pi$. When comparing beam search with $Q^{\pi}$ (Snell et al., 2024), we find that PAVs scale compute efficiency by 8x. Evidently, advantages from the prover in the effective reward positively impact the beam search. Why does A help, and for what choice of the prover $\mu$?

**Result 2: Beam search with too weak/strong provers is sub-optimal.** In Fig. 5(b), for the setting when the base policy is a Gemma-2B SFT model, we compare beam search with PAVs where the provers are given by $BoK(\pi)$, for different values of K. Recall that as K increases, $BoK(\pi)$ becomes stronger. Corroborating our analysis in Sec. 3.4, our results show that neither too weak (Bo2) or too strong (Bo32) provers perform best. Instead, across all values of N, we find Bo4 to be dominant. The advantage values $A^{\mu} \approx 0$ on all steps for very large K, since $Q^{\mu}(s_{h},a_{h}) = 1 - (1 - Q^{\pi}(s_{h},a_{h}))^{K} \to 1$ on all steps, as we increase K. Hence, in order to succeed we need an intermediate-level prover policy. We make similar observations in Figure 5(c) where we take the three base policies (Gemma 2B/9B/27B) and evaluate beam search with PAVs at $N=16$ with the Bo4 over the SFT policies acting as provers. We find that for the 2B and 9B base models, the 9B and 27B provers are most effective respectively, whereas for the 27B model, surprisingly a weaker 9B policy is more effective than the stronger 27B model. The weaker model presumably offers a complementary signal that distinguishes between different actions taken by 27B, aligning with our theoretical observations in Sec. 3.4.

**Result 3: Advantages from the prover policy enable exploration.** As discussed in Sec. 3.1, advantage $\tilde{A}^{\mu}$ measures the progress made by an action agnostic of the value of the previous state, where as $Q^{\pi}$ measures the promise of a particular state. Given a finite capacity beam, our effective reward (Eq. 5), which linearly combines $Q^{\pi}$ and $A^{\mu}$ induces a better tradeoff between exploring new prefixes (states) from where progress can be made and exploiting currently known prefixes with high Q-values. Exploration at initial steps is critical to ensure that the beam at later steps covers diverse partial rollouts each with a high likelihood of producing the correct answer. Thus over-committing to the beam with actions from the same state, regardless of the progress made by each can prove to be sub-optimal over a selection strategy that balances rewarding previous actions $A^{\mu}$ and current states $Q^{\pi}$. Indeed, we observe in Fig. 6, beam search with PAV enhances pass@N performance of the base Gemma 9B model over beam search with $Q^{\pi}$ and i.i.d. sampling.

**Takeaways: Scaling test-time compute with process advantage verifiers.**

* Beam search with PAVs boosts accuracy by >8% & compute efficiency by 1.5-5x over ORMs.
* Utilizing Best-of-K policies (corresponding to the base policy) as provers improves the performance of test-time beam search over the base policy. Optimal provers appear at $K > 1$.

---

## 5 TRAINING-TIME: SCALING RL SAMPLE-EFFICIENCY WITH PAVS

We can also use PAVs to train policies via online reinforcement learning (RL), by using the effective reward $Q^{\pi} + \alpha A^{\mu}$ as dense, per-step rewards. In this section, we compare the sample efficiency of PAV-RL (i.e., $\mathcal{L}_{PAV-RL}$ in Eq. 4) with standard ORM-RL (i.e., $\mathcal{L}_{ORM-RL}$ in Eq. 3) on Gemma 2B and Gemma 9B SFT models, which are further optimized via rejection finetuning (RFT) (Yuan et al., 2023), before using them to initialize RL. To our knowledge, no prior work has successfully demonstrated the use of dense per-step feedback with a process reward model for RL, and we present the first significant set of results establishing the efficacy of this approach. We show that PAV-RL is much more sample-efficient, and enjoys a higher ceiling on the performance of any test-time re-ranker. Additional details for the experiments are in App. E.

**Result 1: PAV-RL is > 7% better than ORM-RL in test accuracy, and 6x sample efficient.** In Fig. 7(a), we report the test accuracies of Gemma 2B and 9B models trained with SFT, RFT, ORM-RL and PAV-RL. PAV-RL improves the RFT policy by 11% for 2B, and 15% for 9B, with > 7% gain over ORM-RL in both cases. Not only do the effective rewards from PAV improve the raw accuracy after RL, this accuracy is attained 6x faster (see Fig. 7(c)) for the 2B run and similarly for the 9B RL run (see App. E). For both 2B and 9B, RL runs, we experiment with two options for the prover policy: (i) 2B SFT policy; and (ii) 9B SFT policy. While both of these provers rapidly become weaker than the base policy within a few gradient steps of RL, a fixed PAV trained with each of these provers is able to still sustain performance gains in RL. More interestingly, we find that the 2B SFT policy serves as the best choice of the prover for both 2B and 9B policies. This observation that a weak prover can still improve the base policy corroborates our results in the didactic setup and our analysis in Sec. 3.4.

**Result 2: PAV-RL achieves higher performance ceiling on test-time re-ranking.** In Fig. 7(b), for the Gemma 2B model, we plot the Pass @N performance for each method, and find (i) Pass @N is higher (> 7%) for PAV-RL, compared to ORM-RL, for any $N \le 128$; and (ii) the rate at which Pass @N improves for PAV-RL is higher than ORM-RL. Both these trends are consistent with our observations in the didactic analysis in Sec. 3.3. Notably, for $N \ge 64$ ORM-RL is worse than the SFT policy, perhaps due to lower entropy over the distribution at the next step resulting in non-diverse candidates. So, why does PAV-RL deliver a policy that can generate more diverse candidates, and does not suffer from the low entropy problem in ORM-RL? We answer this with a key insight on how the primary benefit of PAVs is to promote efficient exploration.

**Result 3: PAVs improve exploration and discover correct solutions to novel problems.** The ORM rewards downweight all steps in an incorrect rollout equally during RL, whereas the effective reward in PAVs, up-weights steps that make progress under the prover, even when the complete rollout is incorrect. This increases the coverage over individual steps that can be proposed at a given prefix. This mechanism for exploration is analogous to test-time search in Sec. 4.1. Hence, the directed supervision from PAVs improves sample-efficiency throughout the course of training (Fig. 7(c)). In fact, we also find that combining the PAV-RL policy with test-time beam search is able to solve a substantially larger number of new problems within smaller compute budgets $(N=16,32)$ that the SFT policy cannot solve with a much larger budget $N=256$ (Fig. 8).

**Takeaway: RL with process advantage verifiers (PAVs) as dense rewards**

* Using trained PAVs as dense rewards in RL boosts scales sample efficiency by 6x, compared to only using sparse ORM rewards, and results in policies with a higher Pass @N performance.
* Advantages from a complementary prover policy improves the sample efficiency of exploration in RL, and produces policies that can discover solutions to hard novel questions.

---

## 6 RELATED WORKS

Outcome reward models (ORMs) (Cobbe et al., 2021b; Uesato et al., 2022) are used for best-of-N search where ORMs are trained to assess correctness using binary classification (Cobbe et al., 2021a; Yu et al., 2023), preference optimization (Hosseini et al., 2024), or next-token prediction (Zhang et al., 2024). In contrast, we propose process reward models (PRMs), that assign scores to intermediate solutions to improve performance with beam-search and enable online RL with dense rewards.

To address issues of sparse feedback in ORMs, recent works (Lightman et al., 2023; Uesato et al., 2022) trained process reward models (PRMs) to densely predict incorrect steps in a multi-step reasoning trace. Since human data collection for process labels is not scalable enough, recent work (Wang et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024) used automated supervision to annotate steps with Q values under the base policy, i.e., the PRMs score a step with the likelihood of future success, when continuing to sample from the step. While Q-value PRMs in Lightman et al. (2023); Luo et al. (2024) were mainly used as verifiers for re-ranking, Snell et al. (2024) used them for test-time beam search. Shao et al. (2024) uses PRMs for RL but found a gain of only 1-2% with PRMs. In our work, we question solely relying on Q-values or advantages of the base policy, and find that measuring progress (i.e., advantages) under a different prover policy can amplify exploration, thus boosting test-time search and RL. Our data collection strategy is similar to (Setlur et al., 2024; Hwang et al., 2024) (i.e., identify "first pits" in traces), but these works only use it to collect preference pairs. Beyond all these, we also characterize which policy to use for computing advantages. Trained outcome or process verifiers can optimize policies similarly to RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022). Prior works (Uesato et al., 2022; Havrilla et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024) showed limited gains from PRMs compared to ORMs or ground-truth rewards ($R_{ex}$). Notably, Havrilla et al. (2024) found expert iteration (Anthony et al., 2017) superior for exploration. In contrast, our work demonstrates that PRMs, combined with outcome rewards in online RL, improve performance by +7% and boost sample efficiency by 6x.

Finally, the idea of improving a sub-optimal expert by mixing policies, as in structured prediction (Chang et al., 2015), or using a "guide" policy for rollouts (Chang et al., 2023), relates to our work. However, we show that even weak prover policies can enhance a base policy by distinguishing its steps through advantages, without needing to surpass the base directly.

---

## 7 CONCLUSION

We explore process rewards to improve outcome-level correctness of a base policy, and show that defining them as advantages of a distinct prover policy enhances exploration and accuracy in math reasoning tasks. We formally characterize the set of good (complementary) prover policies and train process advantage verifiers (PAVs) to predict their advantages. For the base policy, PAVs improved search compute-efficiency by 1.5-5x and accuracy by 8%, while dense online RL with PAV rewards boosted sample efficiency by 5-6x and accuracy by 6%. Challenges remain in designing optimal prover policies and addressing PAV fitting errors, highlighting avenues for future research, such as joint optimization of prover and base policies or alternative advantage estimation methods.

---

## 8 REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

For our experiments on the didactic setup in Section 3.3, we provide details in Appendix B. For experiments on training process advantage verifiers (PAVs) we provide details in Appendix D. Details for experiments that use the trained PAVs for test-time search in Section 4, are provided in Appendix C. Finally, for our experiments on training the base policies with PAVs as dense rewards in reinforcement learning (Section 5), we provide details in Appendix E. All proofs for our theoretical claims can be found in Appendix F. The pretrained model checkpoints for Gemma-2B, 9B, and 27B used in this work are available publicly at https://huggingface.co/google, and the MATH dataset we use from Hendrycks et al. (2021) is also public here: https://github.com/hendrycks/math.
